So, recall that our goal is to implement a
priority queue.
In a priority queue, we have a sequence of
jobs that keeps entering the system, each
job has a priority.
Whenever, we are ready to schedule a job to
execute, we must pick up not the latest job
or the earliest job that we got, but the job
which currently has the highest priority among
the waiting jobs.
Therefore, we need an operation called delete
max which will search for the highest priority
job among those that are pending and schedule
it next.
And we obviously, have an insert operation
which adds these jobs dynamically as they
arrive.
So, we saw last time that a linear structure
will not allow us to simultaneously optimize
these two.
We end up with an order N operation for delete
max or an order N operation for insert.
Then, we saw trivial two dimensional array
which gives us an N root N solution that is
the root N operation for each of these, so
over N operations is order N root N.
But, we said that we will find a much better
data structure using a tree of a special type
called a heap.
So, the heap is going to be a balance tree
whose height is logarithmic in the size that
is if have N nodes in the tree, the height
that is the number of edges from the root
to any leaf will be log N. And with this,
it will turn out the both insert and delete
max are proportional to log N and therefore,
processing N jobs will take time N log N as
supposed to N root N for the array or N square
for the linear representation.
We also said that this heap in principle is
flexible and can grow as large as we want.
So, we do not have to fix in advance the size
of the heap that we need to keep.
So, let us start looking first at what a heap
is.
So, a binary tree is a tree where we have
a root and every node has 0, 1 or 2 children.
So, binary trees in general can have arbitrary
shapes.
So, we could have binary trees which look
like this, where the root has 1 child, this
has 2 children or it could look even more
skewed in one direction.
So, binary trees can have very strange shapes,
but a heap is a binary tree which has a very
specific shape, where we fill up the tree
nodes or we add the tree nodes in a specific
order.
So, first we start at the root, then we must
add the left child of the root, then the right
child and this way keep going level by level
left to right.
So, we add this node, then we add this node,
then we add this node.
So, once I know how many nodes are there in
the tree, I know precisely what the shape
is, so the shape is fixed.
So, that is the first feature of the heap
that if I have a heap with n nodes, then the
shape of the tree is deterministically fixed
by this rule that the n nodes must be inserted
top to bottom, left to right, then we have
a value property.
So, the value property says that...
So, what does happening in the tree is that
we have nodes and each nodes has a value,
so whenever I see a node with value v 1 which
has children v 2 and v 3, then what we want
is, this is bigger than or equal to v 2 and
bigger than or equal to v 3.
So, among these three nodes the largest one
must be v 1, so this is what is called the
max heap property.
So, this is the local property, it just tells
us at every node look at that node, look at
the 2 children, the node must be bigger than
it is 2 children.
So, here is an example of the heap with 4
nodes, so first because it is 4 nodes, every
4 node heap will have the shape.
Because, the first node will be the root,
the second will be the roots left child, third
node will be the right child and the fourth
node will start a new line, then more over
we can check the heap property.
So, we see the 24 is bigger than 11, 24 is
bigger than 7.
So, this is a valid node for a heap property,
11 is bigger than 10 there is no right child,
so this is a valid heap, there is no child
of 7 at all.
So, by trivially this is a valid heap node
and 10 is the valid heap node for the same
reason.
So, every leaf node which has no children
always satisfies the heap property.
So, once you have a leaf node, then nothing
to check.
So, here is another heap, this one has 7 nodes,
so again the shape is fixed and again you
can check that this is bigger than 11 and
7, 11 is bigger than 10 and 5 and 7 is bigger
than 6 and 5 and the rest are all leaf node,
so there is no problem.
So, these are two examples of heaps.
So, what is an example of something that is
not a heap?
So, here we have something which is not a
heap, because the structure is wrong.
So, we said that you cannot leaf holes, you
must go top to bottom left to right, so there
should be some node here, before you add the
node in the right.
So, where is this node?
This node is missing, so this structure is
not right.
For the same reason, this structure is also
not correct, because we have here something
which is missing, a node at this level and
we started a new line.
So, both of these are not a heaps for structural
reasons.
Here on the other have, we saw something which
is a valid structure, in fact we saw heap
before which has the structure, the problem
is with this node.
So, we want 7 to be bigger than 8 and 5, but
this is of course, not case.
7 is not bigger than 8, 7 is smaller than
8.
So, this node 8 actually violates the heap
property, so something can fail to be a heap,
either because the tree structure is wrong
or because at some node the heap property
is violated.
In this case, node that violates the heap
property is 7, because one of it is children
are actually bigger than the node itself.
So, now we have to implement these two operations
on heaps, insert and delete max.
So, let us see how it works?
So, first let us insert 12, so insert 12 means
I have to add a value to the heap.
So, the first thing when I add a value to
the heap is I must expand a tree.
So, where do I put this node?
So, this is now fixed because we know that
heaps can only grow and shrink in a particular
way, so I must add the new node left to right,
top to bottom.
So, in this case if I go left to right, top
to bottom I come to this point, now I cannot
add anything more, so it must come at the
next level.
So, the first thing is that this is where
the new node must come to contain 12.
Now, if I put 12 into this position, the problem
is that I might not have the heap properties
satisfy.
In this case, you can see that the heap property
actually fails right here, because 12 is bigger
than it is parent.
So, 10 violates the heap property, but notice
that this can only happen above, so what I
mean is that when you insert something it
is a leaf.
So, when you since 12 is a leaf, it cannot
fail the heap property below 12, because there
is no child below 12.
If at all the property fails, it is because
the parent of the new node has a value which
is too small.
So, there is a simple way of fix this locally
at least and that is to exchange these two.
So, I exchange this 12 and 10 and now I fix
the problem here, but now I change the value
at this point.
So, I have to look at this configuration to
see whether what I move the 12 into violates
heap property or not and here again you can
see that there is a problem because 12 is
still bigger than its parent.
So, then I exchange that, so now I exchange
this, now in the process what is happened
is that well was gone from here to here.
And now, the first thing we have to convince
ourselves is that the heap that we local heap
property that we just fixed does not need
any further fixing.
In other words, we have to guaranty that there
is no problem and the other side between 12
and 5 and this cannot happen, because we originally
had 11, 5 and something here, we knew that
11 was bigger than 5 and it to bigger than
the something, then we did an exchange and
be bought at 12 here.
So, if at all the problems is only would between
11 and 12 and since if there is a violation
12 is bigger than a 11 that is why there is
a violation, but 11 is known to be bigger
than the other side.
So, if I move 12 to the top of this three
node structure, it cannot be smaller than
other side.
Because, the root currently is already bigger
than the other side, the only reason I move
12 of this because it is still bigger than
that side.
So, then in a nutshell when I do and upward
swap like this I can be sure that do not have
to look on the other side I just keep looking
up.
So, now I got 12 up to this point, so now
I need to check whether there is any further
violation and it turns out the 12 is smaller
than 24.
So, I can stop, so this was the result of
inserting 12 into this heap.
Now, I can insert a new node 33 just to convince
ourselves we know what to do, so as before
if I insert 33.
So, this was the result of the heap after
12 and now I have inserted a 33 here, so it
has to be the right because that is a next
node in the structure and I put the value,
but it violates the heap property between
11 and 33, so I swap it up.
And then again I have a violation here, so
I swap it up again.
Again I have a violation here, so I swap it
up again.
And now I reach the root, so actually it is
become the biggest node and now I can stop.
So, how long does this take?
So, every time we saw every time we do an
insert, we start at a leaf node a new leaf
node that we create and we walk up to the
root.
So, the worst case of such a thing it depend
on the worst case height of the tree, we have
to bound the height of the tree, the height
of the tree by definition if I have a tree
like this.
So, the height of the tree is a longest such
path, the length of the longest path from
the root to the node.
So, we can either counted terms of number
of edges or in number of vertices is with
vertices this one would be 4, if it is edges
it will be 3 does not really matter, but the
point is that the longest such path will determine
the complexity, because the longer the path
the more times I am in need to swap on the
via.
So, what can say about the height of the heap,
so the first thing to notice is that in a
heap because of the way that we are done it.
So, at the root node we have at level 0 we
call this level 0, we have exactly one node
at level 1 at most we have 2 nodes.
So, we can write is as 2 to the power of 0,
this is 2 to the power 1 of course, each of
these will have 1.
So, we will double, so at every level the
number of nodes doubles, because each of the
previous level has two children at most.
So, we have two square, so in this way we
have number of nodes at level 0 is 2 to the
power of 0 at level 1 is 2 to the power 1
at any level i is 2 to the power i.
So, if you have k levels, then the levels
are 0, 1 up to k minus 1 from what we just
said that is 2 to the 0 plus 2 to the 1 plus
2 to the k, the k minus 1, sorry.
So, it will be 2 to the 0 plus 2 to the 1
plus 2 to the k minus 1, now this and one
way to think about it this is a binary number
with k 1s.
So, binary number k 1s is just 2 to the power
k minus 1, in other wards if I fill up a binary
tree for k levels I will have at most 2 to
the k minus 1 nodes.
So, therefore, the number of nodes is exponential
in number of levels.
So, therefore, if I have the number of nodes
in the number of levels must be logarithmic
in that.
And the number of levels is what determines,
the logarithmic length of the longest path
and therefore, insert an any heap will take
time log of N, because there is every path
is going to be guaranty to be of height log
N.
So, the other operation that we need to implement
for a priority queue is to delete the maximum.
So, the first question is where is the maximum
in a heap?
So, the claim is that the maximums always
at the root, why is that because if I start
anywhere I know that among the any 3 nodes
the maximum is that the top.
So, if I look at 33 for example, 33 is bigger
than 24 and 7, but inductively I know that
24 must be the biggest node in this sub tree
and 7 must be the biggest node in the sub
tree.
So, therefore, 34 is 33 bigger than both it
must be the biggest node overall in this entire
tree.
So, the module is the mod 3 maximum values
already at the root.
So, now the question is if the maximum values
at the root, how do we remove it from the
tree efficiently.
So, let say you remove the maximum value,
so then this leaves us with a hole, we do
not have any value at the root now, at the
same time because we have removed the value
we have reduce the number of values in the
tree by one.
But, we said that the structure of the tree
is fixed, if you reduced by one we cannot
remove the root, we must remove the last node
going on this left to right top to bottom
order.
So, we must in fact to remove the node here
this node as to go, so now we have a value
which is homeless, it does not have a root
node to belong to and we have a home which
is empty.
So, what we will do is we will move this 11
to the root.
Now, unfortunately because we are disrupt
the heap order by doing this taking some arbitrary
node from leaf moving into the root, we do
not know whether we have the heap property
satisfied or not.
Now, the only place where the heap property
can be violated at the root, because everywhere
else the local neighborhood was not touched
by this operation, you only other place their
neighborhood was touch to is here, but always
did was remove a node.
If you remove a leaf then it cannot violate
a heap property, because for the upper node
it is already bigger than both this tree.
So, this okay, So, the only place we could
have a violation is here and indeed we do,
because 11 and 24 on the wrong order.
So, we will start now the storing the heap
property downwards, when we inserted we did
upstairs, it start here and look at this and
then we will look at both directions and we
take of the bigger one of the two and move
it up.
So, we swap with the largest child, suppose
for instance that this had been not 7, but
17 then what could have happened, if you are
move 17 up his viewed about 17 the 11 and
24 and this would not a fix the heap property,
because this would still be wrong.
So, we must take the bigger of the two and
move it up, because among these three the
biggest value must be at the top that is the
definition of the max heap property, so we
exchange the 11 and the 24.
So, 24 goes up to the root and then 11 has
come in this direction, so we must again check
whether this part which has now been disturbed
satisfies the heap property.
And of course, in this case it does not because
11 and 12 are not in the correct thing.
So, again among these 3 I have to take the
maximum value up, so I take the 12 up and
move the 11 down.
And now I have to check this section whether
this heap property is satisfied, here it is
satisfied now we want stop.
So, in delete max I start from the root and
I walk downwards.
So, supposing we do this again, then I remove
24.
And then I move the 10 from the last leaf
to the top.
Then, I again have to fix this problem, so
I exchange the 10 and the 12.
Then, I have to look at this and fix these
problems the biggest of this trees is 11 I
fix the 10 and the 11 and I get it.
So, now by making sure that I take the biggest
one of again I do not walk down the other
directions.
So, I am always walking down as single path,
so once again just like insert the cost is
proportional to the height.
And since we know that in a heap the height
is logarithmic, delete max is also an order
log N operation.
So, what we have done is, we have shown that
a heap actually does both delete max and insert
in log N time.
Now, and other very nice property about heaps
is that we do not actually need to maintain
a very complex tree likes structure, we can
actually do heaps in arrays to do this we
observe that we can canonically number all
the nodes in a heap, we start number in the
root by 0, the first node we fill below the
root by 1, the other child 2 and so on.
So, I have a numbering 0, 1, 2, so I can actually
represent this heap as an arrays heap which
has this is 0, 1, 2 and so on.
Now, in this the claim is if I am at a position
i, so if I have some position i, then the
children of this are 2 i plus 1 and 2 i plus
2 you can check this everywhere.
So, therefore, if I want to actually go to
a heap and ask something about the heap property,
then I will just look at the position i, then
I will jump ahead to position 2 i plus 1 and
2 i plus 2.
So, completely using the array alone within
the array I can look up the children of a
node and by inverting this operation, if I
look at j minus 1 by 2 and take the floor
of that then I will come backwards.
So, with the child is 2 i plus 1 2 i plus
2 then the parent is j minus 1 by 2 and then
it might be fractional, so take the integer
parts.
So, floor means take the integer part of j
minus 1 by 2.
So, this is not j minus half, so it has j
minus 1 the whole by 2.
So, for example, for 12 j minus 1 is the 11,
the 11 by 2 is 5 and half floor of that is
5, so the parent at 12 is 5.
So, you can check that this is formed, so
therefore I can now do all my heap manipulation
with in an array, which is very convenient
I just have to write an array and then whenever
I do these operations which involve walking
up and down the heap I will just uses 2 i
plus 1 2 i plus 2 formula what are use this
floor of j minus 1 by 2 formula.
So, how do we start this whole process off?
How do we build a heap from a given set of
values.
So, a very naive strategy would work as follows
and given a set of values n values x 1 to
x n.
So, I start with an empty heap and then I
insert x 1, so I have a heap of size 1 then
I insert x 2, so now I heap of size 2 and
so on.
So, I do n inserts and each insert takes log
N time at most, so we will take less time
we will take log i time if I have inserted
i items so far, so for but let us take log
N as an upper bound.
So, overall if I insert these N elements I
will build the heap also and N log N time.
Now, in fact it turns out that there is a
better way to do this, so if I look at any
array I can think of this as a heap I can
just imagine that it is ordered.
Because, every array as a heap interpretation,
I can imagine that this is how the array looks,
if I think of it the heap of course, it does
not satisfy the heap property.
But, but this is how it would look if I arranged
as the heap.
Now, in this anything which is at the leaf
level does not need to be check, because it
has no children all leaves trivially satisfied
the heap property.
So, I need to start fixing things only at
the previous level, so I walk back to this.
So, I come here and x 3 I fix the heap property
with respective it is children, then at x
2 at fix the property with respective each
children, in the process something a up and
down to only one level, then I will come to
x 1 and I will fix it is problem, now this
might involved 2 levels.
So, for each level k minus 1 k minus 2 that
it.
So, leaves are at level k at level k minus
1 k minus 2 on up to the root, we fix the
heap property.
So, as we go up fixing the heap property means,
walking down like we did for delete max, walking
down to the leaf.
So, each level we go up the length of this
path increases by 1, but because the levels
double as we go down they have as we go up.
So, the number of nodes for which we have
to check this extra length path goes down
by factor of two.
So, now if you do the analysis should we are
not going to do exactly, it turns out at in
this process the number of updates you need
to make a heap is actually only order N.
So, if you use this bottom up heapification,
then it will be an order N procedure.
So, just to get a better picture of what is
going on, so let us assume that we had 15
elements I had list and we actually through
it do it out like this and the clam is that
these n minus 2 node n by 2 nodes, which is
roughly have it is actually 8 out of 15 already
satisfied the heap property, so this is nothing
to be done.
So, then I go one level up and I fix these,
when I fix these I have to do it for 4 nodes
and each of them the repair will involve one
swap at most or no swaps, worst case it will
all be one swap.
Then, I will up one level and now for each
of these nodes I will have to possibly go
down 2 paths of length 2.
So, each of them will involve a height 2 repair
that is 2 step of thing better than all from
4 nodes I have gone to 2 nodes.
So, the only half as many nodes which required
only one step more.
And then finally, when I go to the root I
might have to do kind of fix which involves
swapping down to the last leaf, so 3 swaps.
But, this only one node which does this, so
therefore since there is trade off that the
number of nodes to be fix is halving and the
length is only increasing by one it turns
out that this whole operand needs only order
N time.
So, to summarize go to we have seen is that
heaps implement priority queues using special
balance trees, in these tree both insert and
delete max are logarithmic we can use this
bottom up heapify to actually build a heap
and order N time.
And what is most useful is that this heap
can actually be manipulated very simply as
an array, now one thing which we can do is
to invert the heap condition.
So, we can say that whenever be see v 1, v
2 and v 3 we want v 1 to be smaller than both
v 2 and v 3.
So, this is what is called a min heap, what
we have been doing, so for is a max heap.
So, sometimes you want to keep track of the
smallest priority and remove the smallest
priority item, just think of how for example,
you rank people in an exam.
So, you are somebody if in a competitive exam,
the smaller the rank the higher the priority.
So, if you have rank 1 then you have highest
priority.
So, this some situation it is natural to think
of smaller numbers is higher priority.
So, you want have to do anything very much,
we just have to change the heap rule to be
minimum.
So, that the each node is smaller than its
two children and then everything would work
exactly as we have done, so for.
So, we have two types of heaps, you have max
heaps and you have min heaps and all the differs
in max heaps and min heaps is the heap condition
on the nodes and the correspondingly whether
the operation you implement is delete min
and delete max.